# Production Directors

_Reading time ~ 45 minutes_

Your role is the most important. The most valuable role a modern manager plays is that of mentor; you set the tone for your team. That means your skillset, your breadth of knowledge, and your behaviour will be held as an example. You may not be writing code yourself but you need to be aware of the latest and upcoming technologies in order to hire developers, support developers, and gain their respect. You may not have the keenest eye for design, but you need to be aware the latest techniques and best practice and be able to offer constructive feedback in order to hire and support designers and gain their respect.

The role of a senior manager has changed since the concept was invented. Managers used to have a direct line of sight to all employees and were personally in control of the career development of each member of staff, personally guiding and instructing each of them. The web has diluted this role. The web makes skills, knowledge, and power more accessible to everyone. These days a senior manager may just be a colleague with additional leadership and administrative tasks. The web is also changing so fast that not just designers and developers but also managers need to keep up. Many senior managers gained their skills in a different time - the industry is in fact only 20 years old at the time of writing this and indeed the environment was completely different just 5 years ago. Change is always hard but in this industry it is a requirement.

## Change is good

> "It's not the strongest of the species that survive, nor the most intelligent, but the one most responsive to change" - _Charles Darwin_

Maybe you have your own superiors to report to. All too often, middle managers rarely change. It's easier to maintain the status quo; as long as the money's coming through and everything's ticking along then why rock the boat? Their jobs aren't in jeopardy unless things get worse so why introduce the inherent risk in implementing changes to further improve? The focus is not on the quality of the work but with the organisational politics - maintaining their current level of authority against the up and comers, while trying to find ways to elevate themselves.

Risk is inherent in change and by nature we are wary of risk, especially when the risk may impact the income and livelihood of not just yourself but your entire team. The fact is however, that the web industry is a constant tide of change and if you don't go with the flow you will be left ashore, high and dry. That will surely be worse for your whole team. The industry is young and immature. We are still experimenting with ways to do things, and so your way might not be the best way. People are constantly releasing and publicising new tools, techniques, and management practices that could benefit your team immeasurably.

A classic example is the mobile revolution. In 2007 Apple released the iPhone with a full-featured web browser and, later, an app store open to developers worldwide. Even before then people were able to browse websites on their mobile phones but this triggered a rapid industry-wide change. We began to consider how to best plan for and build web projects that would be accessed on small screens and on low-bandwidth connections, that would be tapped and swiped rather than clicked and tabbed. Skip to 2009 and we're talking about “Responsive design”, which encompasses various approaches to making web projects device-agnostic. Before responsive design, it was common practice for a designer to create a high-fidelity mockup using graphics software like Adobe Photoshop and throwing it over the cubicle wall to the developer, so to speak, who would then cut and code it up to pixel perfect dimensions. The industry as a whole came to realise that we could no longer be “pixel perfect”. With thousands of hand-held devices on the market, all with different dimensions, just how many pixels is perfect? What does that even mean? People began trying to design and code mockups in 3 different sizes: mobile, tablet, and desktop, but that just exacerbated the problem - how big is a “tablet”? What happens for devices that are between your prescribed tablet and desktop sizes? What about smart TVs or wide-screen displays? Now we have wearable devices like smart watches etc. etc. Mobile also had other implications: performance, accessibility, usability. This required us to focus on content more, simplify our designs, find new ways to present images and video. The 'Web 2.0' skeuomorphic design trend gradually transitioned to “flat” design. We began to skip high-fidelity mockups, building interactive prototypes and designing directly in the browser. We focused on more agile and iterative project management methodologies that would allow us to test across multiple devices earlier.

And yet, years after it was established as *worst-practice*, today there are still teams producing Photoshop mockups, talking about “the ipad version”, using placeholder “Lorem ipsum” content, and having designers and developers work independently. We're still discussing in forums, in blog posts and on podcasts how to best handle mobile, emphasising performance issues, design techniques, project management methodologies. Why? Because people are naturally resistant to change.

If you're not at least trying to follow best practice, then how can you expect to hire good people? Why would skilled designers and developers want to join a team that struggles to produce work that can stand up against modern rivals, or where they may not have the opportunity to use their latest skills or be encouraged to try new things?

Changing the way your team operates, when necessary, is not just about following industry trends, or trying to optimise the quality of your work, it's necessary for building, growing, and maintaining your team. You may also discover that you increase efficiency, revenue, or discover new kinds of work that your team can produce and you can sell to your clients or stakeholders.

## Building a team

Steve Jobs famously wasn't a strong programmer or designer or even a likeable manager. His strength was surrounding himself with capable people and proving centralised executive power for a strong team. You need to recognise that your team is highly skilled and highly motivated. You need to try and find ways to enable them to be the best they can be. That means you need to build a team that covers all the skills that your projects require so that you don't have people working on tasks they don't enjoy or can't complete confidently. You need to support that team with the required resources, training, and feedback; indeed you also need to ensure that the work coming in, the work you're tasking your team with, is appropriate to their skillset. You need to be aware of the team's strengths and weaknesses, finding ways to optimise the former and minimise the latter.

Someone in your role can't afford to be getting your hands dirty with the finer details of every project. As much as you may enjoy the details of the design or technology, you have to let things go. Understand that your team members can be better at the work than you are and may also be more up to date with the latest tools and techniques. They just need some idea of what do so your role is to give them guidance and prioritise tasks for them.

Ideally you want your team to have a wide range of appropriate skillsets. Through the work you assign them, you are building their experience and looking to expand on those skillsets to add value to your organisation. You need to have a vision of the team you're going to build and what your organisation will look like once you've filled all the essential positions.

### Hiring & firing

People are your primary asset. There are many ways to find potential team members which we won't go into here. What is important is to consider what kind of skillset you need to compliment your team or fill a gap in the skills you already have; make sure you know exactly what you need. A good idea is to create well-written job descriptions. Try and be as articulate, unique, and specific as possible. The better your job descriptions are the more likely that you will attract the top candidates. These don't have to be the formal job descriptions you see on recruitment websites; just focus on the skills and experience you're looking for and what kind of people you want. You then need to find ways to assess those desired skills and experience in your potential candidates, and consider the performance measures for new team members.

This is perhaps the most important part of your role and thus it should take up a great deal of your time commitment. Spend time and resources finding the right people; a team with the wrong people is a broken or ineffective team because the performance of each team member impacts every other team member. The people you hire can have a huge impact on your organisation so it really is worth spending the time and effort on hiring the right people. Constantly churning through less than ideal candidates, hiring them on a probation basis and then letting them go when they inevitably fail to perform, only serves to waste your time and resources, damages team cohesion, and creates an atmosphere of instability and paranoia. Sometimes it might be more beneficial to leave a role vacant while you search for new candidates. This puts a bit of pressure on your existing team members, forcing them to cover the vacancy themselves, perhaps earning themselves new skills and experience. Of course, there is a fine balance between testing your team and overworking them.

Also consider hiring remote workers. The web enables people to work from anywhere there is an internet connection and so the community of online commuters is constantly growing. This essentially expands your pool of potential candidates immeasurably and may be the solution if you are struggling to find them in your local area. Obviously, and especially if you have never worked with remote employees before, this may present it's own difficulties: scheduling meetings, timezones, managing salaries and taxes etc.

When sending out job offers, try to increase your reach by flooding any remotely relevant platform. You never know where your potential candidates might be so you need to scatter your seeds far and wide. Be wary of wasting money on recruiters, but if you find a reliable one then stick with them - they may be expensive but if they get you a great hire then your investment instantly pays off. Keep in mind that everyone wants to hire the best candidates so they will get snapped up quickly. You'll need to be prepared to move quickly and possibly pay recruiters' fees. Finally when drawing candidates in, remember that you are selling your business to them just as you're selling your services to your clients.

### Who to hire

No one is great at interviews until they've done lots of them. Unfortunately, the only way you can really assess someone's suitability to join your team is to conduct some sort of interview. Remember that this should be a conversation, not an interrogation. Different roles may require different kinds of interviews. For example, you may want to give developers some kind of coding test to assess their approach to solving particular kinds of problems; maybe you won't need to do this if they have provided you with access to their git repositories to review or a technical blog. The problem with many interview techniques is that they test skills that are irrelevant to real working life. You want to hire people who can do the job immediately, are intelligent and motivated enough to continue to learn so that they constantly improve, and who are generally nice people whom your other team members can get along with.

Remember that the most important skill for any web professional is their ability to learn. Therefore you shouldn't hire people based on what they already know. The worst interviews may give candidates outdated questionnaires that ask questions about obscure syntactical features of, for example, JavaScript or PHP or questions about Photoshop tools or filters. If you are looking for JavaScript or PHP or Photoshop skills and they don't know the answer then you may think it's a sign that they are an unsuitable candidate. But it provides you with very limited data; you've wasted precious interview time collecting very narrow set of data about the potential candidate, and you've essentially only tested what they can remember in an interview room. Don't over-value present skills and under-value future growth potential. The number of potential candidates with the exact knowledge you're looking for is smaller than the number of potential candidates who are clever enough to learn what they need to know to do the job well. In a real working environment, people would have access to the web and all its information, which can and does fill knowledge gaps. There's nothing wrong with hiring someone who takes the initiative to research or ask when they don't know something.

The question you need to be constantly asking yourself when interviewing a candidate is “Can they do this job?” This is not the same as “Can they do this job right now?”. You have to be confident that no matter what their current skill or knowledge or experience level is, they will get better at the job. So how do you assess learning ability?

Firstly, ensure they can intelligently discuss their topic. You're not hiring anyone on the basis of any individual nugget of knowledge but rather a complex understanding of what they will potentially be working on. Try and find out what specific areas they know most about and ask them candidate to explain them to you in detail. Such a collaborative discussion will reveal their understanding of complex concepts as well as their ability to communicate. A designer may be able to create beautiful interfaces and a developer may be able to write complex algorithms quickly, but the job of a web professional is to work as part of a team to achieve something bigger. People who are unable or unwilling to communicate with their colleagues are only doing half their job.

Some good general interview advice is to try and make your candidate as relaxed and comfortable as possible, hopefully as comfortable as if they already had the job and were a long-standing employee. Stressed or panicked answers to questions are not reliable or representative of the candidate's knowledge or normal state - you don't want to hire someone who only performs under pressure.

> “I am wiser than this man, for neither of us appears to know anything great and good; but he fancies he knows something, although he knows nothing; whereas I, as I do not know anything, so I do not fancy I do. In this trifling particular, then, I appear to be wiser than he, because I do not fancy I know what I do not know.” - _Socrates_

This well known Socratic paradox from Plato's Apology, implies that the wisest people are those who are aware of what they don't know. It encapsulates the scientific endeavour, and you may liken an interview to a scientific experiment. You're putting your candidates under conditions in which you can test your hypothesis - that they are good enough to do the job.

Through your interview discussion your objective is to discover the length and breadth of their knowledge; that means finding their limits, but not goading them into failing the interview by getting things wrong nor showing off your own superior knowledge, but trying to see how they react when asked a question to which they don't know the answer. Observing this reaction can tell you a lot about your potential candidate. Weak candidates will try and waffle, make random guesses, or make something up. It's always obvious when someone is making wild guesses, and it's also a sign of intellectual dishonesty - they think you won't notice and that you'll be satisfied with such an answer. Not a wise move according to Socrates. Better candidates will frankly admit when they don't know and may ask questions. The strongest candidates will also offer attempts to extrapolate an answer from their current knowledge, or suggest what they would do to research the answer. They're being honest and also showing you that they like to figure and find things out. Of course, in order to ensure you can explore a candidate's limits, you need to ensure that you yourself, or the person interviewing them, surely has a huge wealth of knowledge on the subject themselves! We'll cover more on this later.

As well as assessing the scale of their knowledge, you need to find out how they acquired it. Someone who doesn't constantly improve is not going to increasingly add value to your organisation. Your ideal candidate is someone with proven ability and desire to learn new skills and then apply them. Ask them about their career trajectory and how they intend to progress. Try and whittle out evidence of increasing responsibility in previous jobs, not necessarily new job titles, because that's evidence that their expanding knowledge and skillset have been previously recognised.

So after establishing levels of knowledge and learning ability, you'll want to explore more about the candidate's personal style and experience level; it's unlikely you're going to get that information from a CV or resumé. In fact, you may as well leave such things in the 20th century where they belong. People who are impressed by academic credentials make for bad managers in the 21st century. Nowadays higher education is more accessible than ever and so the education level of many candidates will often be almost indistinguishable, and it's unlikely that you'll be familiar enough with their academic institution, the details of the course the candidate took, or how much they got out of it. All you know is that they passed some exams. Asking them to provide details on their academic career is a waste of time, for a college degree or diploma, even an absence of one, is rarely a good predictor or indicator of ability as a web professional. Academics independently study theories and pass exams that only simulate real-world situations. In contrast real-world designers and developers work closely with others to plan, code, publish, and maintain software. Some people can do both well, but it's certainly not a perfect correlation.

Another poor indicator of skills and ability is the candidate's previous employers. Just because somebody worked at a large or famous company like IBM or Ogilvy or Samsung or Apple it doesn't mean that they were a successful team member or had any valuable contribution to the company's most famous products and services. In fact most especially in big companies there are many teams all of which perform and work differently. Perhaps you might be familiar enough with another company's hiring process that you can be confident that the candidate's credentials meet your requirements, however in most cases you just need to throw out the CV and focus on the person sitting in front of you and what they are saying.

OK so the CV isn't all bad; you *do* need to assess the candidate's relevant experience. However that doesn't mean you shouldn't hire someone with no experience. What if the candidate has no previous experience? What if they're fresh out of school or what if they're changing careers or what if they're a young and enthusiastic teenager? How do you assess their overall value? Even someone with as little as just a year's experience doesn't really have enough to show whether they will be any good. In this case a more traditional technical interview may be your only option. The important thing is to first establish exactly what it is that you need to know about the candidate and what they can do, then set up a test that targets those specific skills.

A popular interview technique, especially when hiring developers and people with no or little previous experience, is practical tests... but please be careful. Writing code on a whiteboard or a piece of paper is far removed from a real-world code-writing situation. Similarly writing code, even if on a computer, within a fixed time limit is also unrealistic and not a useful predictor of style or ability. If writing code under time pressure is part of your job requirements then I'm afraid your company has a bigger problem than staff shortages. If you do need to hold some kind of practical interview, then allow people to do it at home or in their own time prior to the arranged interview. Rather than asking a developer to write some common algorithm or data structure, give them a real-world example - in this case ask them to design or plan or code up a web page based on some set specifications. It doesn't matter if they copy code from elsewhere or use 3rd party libraries and frameworks - a good engineer will maximise productivity by using 3rd party code to solve any common problems, just as a good designer will take inspiration from other successful websites. There really isn't any risk of cheating as long as your specifications are suitably specific. Such a test has the added advantage of being able to see their coding style and offer a point of discussion in the interview - why did they choose that library or framework? Why did they take that approach? etc. By asking your candidates to solve unrealistic problems under a time limit while at your office then how do you know they're not just remembering someone else's solution? There is no value in hiring someone for what they can remember in an interview room when it could be Google'd in a matter of seconds.

Lastly, after you know the candidate has the required knowledge, skills, and learning ability, you may ask yourself if they are the right "fit". You may be tempted to hire friends or family, but this should definitely be avoided because it comes with too much baggage. Existing personal relationships will impact your professional relationships, creating biases and implicit power structures that will obstruct the smooth operation of your team. This compromises both your personal friendship as well as the success of your organisation.

There are no interview questions you can ask to establish whether someone is going to be a nice person to work with or whether the rest of your team is going to enjoy working with them. Personality is very subjective and so you will undoubtedly have an unconscious personal bias. Everyone who's carried out interviews before will have probably noticed themselves biased towards the happier, more confident candidates, thus risking turning away potentially stronger candidates who may just need time to become comfortable with the new work environment. A common solution is to just focus solely on the technical part of the interview, the exact content of the candidate's answers, or a standardised practical test. As mentioned above, this comes with its own pitfalls. As well as concentrating on what the candidate says, you'll also need to focus on _how_ they say it. Asking yourself whether you want to work with this person and whether you want to be friends with them are two different questions. The team you're building doesn't need to be a family, a homogeneous group of craft-ale-drinking hipsters, and you don't even need to have anything at all in common - you just need to be able to respect each other professionally and like each other enough to work together without suffering personal conflicts. There is a very small chance that all the best candidates look and behave the same or have roughly the same interests, so lack of diversity hints that your hiring policy is flawed and that you're not necessarily hiring the best people - this may appear obvious and off putting to the strongest new job applicants. A person who could be good for your team might not necessarily be someone you would chose to be friends with. It's very tempting to find someone who could be both, but ultimately that's neither sustainable nor a reliable metric for team success.

While homogeneity can be so disastrous, you obbviously don't want to hire just for the sake of diversity either. You basically just need to have a "no dickheads" policy. You will come across the over-confident technical geniuses, the bitter and cynical bullies and snobs that are usually quite easy to identify in an interview through signs of arrogance, rudeness, or inattention to detail; these are personality flaws that people can rarely keep in check, even if just for a couple of hours. No level of brilliance can compensate for poisoning the morale of your team by people who are unpleasant or demeaning to their coworkers. No matter how desperate you are to hire someone, it will cost you more in the long run.

What if you can't find the “right” person for the job? Maybe you're not looking in the right places. Where are you posting job offers? Perhaps try a new channel, or increase the profile of your organisation through a blog or social media. Become involved in communities like hacker news or tech crunch, attend and sponsor conferences. It's important to remember that **hiring people takes time**. Hiring the wrong person, especially "stop-gap" people when you're desperate, will be more expensive long-term and wastes more time while you continue to wait for someone better. The wrong person will not only fail to perform the tasks that you require of them, they will also bring the rest of the team down, making them less efficient at performing theirs. A new hire needs training and support, and is thus a huge investment for your organisation. Can you afford to invest in just anyone?

Put time into perfecting and standardising your interview technique and be sure that everyone in your organisation giving interviews are doing them properly. It requires a great deal of thought and creativity; it's extremely difficult, but that's HR for you. It will surely pay off in the end when you have a stronger, happier team and can produce better work, for a better web.

### Delegating

An important part of your role is to delegate tasks to those you are confident can complete them independently. You should ensure that they have the authority to do the task and that the rest of the team recognises that authority, which may require organisational changes.

You may be too busy to assign tasks to everyone in the whole team or deal with each person individually, just are you are unlikely to be involved in the minor details of every project. For instance for each project you should have one person assigned to be responsible for the project and you should hold that person accountable. That person is your window to the project progress and how it's being managed. That's not to say that such project leaders should be left to their own devices or just forwarded emails from clients. You still need to make the business and product decisions, with them making the more technical decisions. Your team's work will be evaluated on how well it meets the stakeholder requirements, and you are ultimately responsible for ensuring that it does.

Delegation is a skill. How you delegate tasks to your team determines your relationship with them. That means you can't just sit back and forward emails, nor can you perch on someone's desk and hold their hand through every task. You need to establish what each person individually can do and how much support they need, until eventually they need none at all.

## Supporting people

Now you have your team, you need to keep them happy and productive and ensure they are constantly improving, increasing in value.

### Equipment & tools

Firstly, the obvious, you need to ensure your team have everything they need to do their jobs. That means decent computers, a fast internet connection, and comfortable seating so that everyone can participate easily. What else? Paper and pens for sketching out ideas. Accessible whiteboards and kanban boards for planning and project management. Internal communication and planning tools, online service subscriptions, and secure code repositories. Servers for development and testing environments, perhaps others for showing to remote clients or stakeholders. It all adds up, but it's all necessary.

### Time

Even if you have a huge project deadline or looming deadlines, it's crucial that your team is resourced not just with adequate equipment but also with time. The web is moving forward at astonishing pace and it takes a great deal of time for web professionals to stay on top of the latest tools, techniques, and best practice. We need time to research, study, and practice. We need to be able to experiment and make mistakes.

It's always apparent in the final product when the team has been rushed to finish a project, hasn't had the time to properly learn about the technology they've applied, or have implemented something inappropriate because they lacked the time to learn about the potential alternatives. The design becomes inconsistent and the code becomes messy and difficult to manage.

The best way to learn is through practice and so side projects should be encouraged and time should be allocated for people to work on them. Whatever they learn will be a valuable skill that your organisation can apply, while it also rewards the team with independence and creative freedom. They may even build something that you can use or market to clients or investors. Google for instance encourages all employees spend 20% of their time working on side projects that could potentially benefit the company; some such projects turned out to be Gmail and Adsense, two of the company's most famous _and_ most profitable. Maybe set aside Friday afternoons, when everyone is winding down for the weekend, for side projects and training? Rather than wasting time not working on direct income-generating projects it may prove invaluable.

### Feedback

Just like you want to know what the project owners think about the work you produce, your team wants to know what _you_ think about the work they produce. Afterall, how can they improve their work without qualified feedback? Providing feedback not only helps people focus their learning activities and consider more their own performance, it also makes them feel valued. It shows them that you are interested in their performance and you want to invest in their improvement.

Of course, like we talking about throughout this book, feedback needs to be structured. Start off with a job description or an explicit list of expectations in terms of tasks and responsibilities. Use the job description to asses how the person is performing those tasks and undertaking those responsibilities. If you are not in a position to assess every aspect of the person's performance, then delegate to somebody who is; for example, code reviews should be done by someone who has at least an equal understanding of the code the person has written. Also consider what practical advice you may be able to give the person in order to improve their performance, even if they are already outstanding.

It's important to remember that performance reviews are for the team member and not for you, and the person being reviewed needs to know that. They should be made to feel comfortable and relaxed, not like they're the target of a pogrom or communist-style self-criticism. Make it clear from the start upon hiring people that there will be performance reviews. Also keep performance reviews on a fixed schedule so that they become normalised and expected. As well as letting them know your opinion of their performance, you can make them more comfortable by encouraging them to review you and the organisation as a whole. What to they enjoy? What are we doing right? What are we doing wrong? What improvement suggestions do they have? Depending on your team you may want to gather feedback anonymously somehow, but by doing it in person it make the process more two-way, more interactive, and empowers people by making them aware that they are a valued member of the team who potentially has a say over how their organisation is run. This is a great opportunity for you to gather new ideas to improve your organisation's overall happiness and performance.

This is also your perfect opportunity to have a one-to-one conversation with each team member and really get to know them. What are their personal interests, what motivates them? This will help you connect with them on a more personal level, planting mutual trust.

Unfortunately, not all team members are going to perform well all the time. Take into account that people's personal lives, even the time of day or the season, may have temporary a impact on their performance. If you are really unsatisfied with someone's work, then you need to let them know and give them a chance to either explain, improve, or leave. They may be a great designer or developer or project manager but maybe your organisation is just not right for them. When making recommendations for improvement, be specific about what you expect to see and by when. These are always awkward conversations to have and you'll need to be delicate in your approach. You want to remind them that by the very fact of having this conversation, you are confident that they can improve and that issues can be resolved. You have invested in them and you want to help them.

If you are absolutely convinced someone cannot improve, is not making the effort, or has ignored advice from previous conversations, then you _have_ to let them go. A weak team member brings down the whole team and you cannot afford anything detrimental to the success of your strongest members.

### Training

You've probably noticed a theme throughout this chapter, that working with the web is all about learning and any successful web organisation needs to actively encourage and sponsor learning activities as much as possible. Training can take many forms. Conferences, workshops, and training days are all good ideas but may not always be sustainable or feasible in terms of time and money, especially if you're based in an industry-remote area (i.e. anywhere outside of North America, Northern Europe, or Australia).

Web professionals generally all share a common passion and desire to create. To keep that passion and desire alive you need to constantly enable them to improve their skills. The desire to learn is what has driven such explosive growth in the industry over the past decade and led to countless blogs and open-source projects dedicated to sharing knowledge. This common passion and desire to share knowledge means developing an internal training program is potentially very easy. Your team already has a vast reservoir of skills, knowledge, and experience that can be shared and developed with little effort or cost.

Do you really need to organise internal training sessions? Good designers and developers teach themselves, right? Yes, but some will inevitably be stronger in certain areas than others, or may choose to research different areas. By encouraging and sponsoring people to share what they have independently learned, it boosts their confidence as they gain recognition and reputation within the team. People will be inspired to seek and share their own specialist knowledge to attain the reputation points. Let's not forget either the old maxim that teaching reinforces knowledge, so by having people share what they know, they themselves gain a better understanding of the topic. By knowing their collegues capabilities, they will be able and willing to find areas for innovation. This can also improve overall project flow as the team becomes more responsive to problems that arise; people will know who to consult when they need help with particular tools or technologies. The whole team will know their own strengths and weaknesses and become more cohesive.

Again, by proving your investment in your team and showing that their current skills and future potential are fully valued, your team will be more committed. Most importantly, regular and well-run training sessions will make the team better at their jobs. They will learn more and be able to face more challenges, becoming much more productive.

Perhaps you have superiors that you need to convince, in which case you will be more likely to garner support if you can present evidence of specific benefits before drawing resources away from paid work. Ultimately, it's your team and you don't need approval. If your initiative pays off, you will have clear metrics to present that will reflect well on both you and your team.

So how do you implement well-run training sessions? Afterall, your team may have no teaching experience. They may be great at their job, they may even be eager to share, but what if they are introverted or lacking in confidence? A training session about an interesting topic that fails to make an impact is just a waste of time. To start with, you should make everyone aware of what your goal is in organising such training sessions. Explain the benefits and try to be flexible with people's work schedules. Make a plan by first looking at recent projects and identifying skills, tools, and technologies that were used. You should already be aware of any issues that arose, but if not speak to the team and identify any knowledge gaps or points of particular difficulty. You'll also need to be familiar with the current trends of the industry as a whole as well as keeping an eye on what's beyond the horizon. From team performance reviews you may be able to extrapolate certain areas of focus or interest, and you should already be aware of the skills and levels of expertise of each team member. Start off by encouraging the more senior members, or those most excited and confident, to get up and talk. Make sure they are comfortable with organising and presenting training sessions and give them enough time to prepare. Give them guidance on what is expected while still allowing them the freedom to present their topic in their own way.

#### Make a plan

The training plan should be kept simple. List some specific topics you wish to include based on both your own knowledge and team suggestions. Either take volunteers or assign them to people who you are confident have sufficient skills and knowledge. Plan the sessions in order of priority; what skill areas might the majority of your team be lacking? What skills are going to be more valuable towards incoming projects? Do try and plan sessions based on people's own availability; if a key developer is going to be absent or too busy on the day, the session may need to be rescheduled. It won't always be the case that the team can drop what they're doing, so obviously you'll want to avoid days surrounding project releases.

Once a week is usually a good schedule. Any more and your project delivery may be impacted (which if you have superiors is not going to go down well!), any less and the training regime risks being forgotten or neglected altogether. Indeed too much rescheduling or cancelling will only imply that the training isn't important. As with any schedule, it will be more successful if it is normalised. Once you've found a suitable time to hold sessions, try and keep it at the same time at regular (e.g. weekly) intervals. Don't forget to book rooms and issue calendar invitations in advance! While we're talking about timing, plan to keep the sessions long enough to provide sufficient detail, and short enough to keep everyone engaged. If you need to extend the session somehow, you might consider homework exercises that people can do in their own time.

Finally, make a note of each training session, including the date, the topic, who presented, and the attendance. This will eventually provide you with a good overview of who should know what, who is the most passionate, and overall team value. Also make notes of any problems, how people reacted, how the presenter performed, areas not covered, and potential new topics for future sessions. The plan should be available for the whole team to view and collaborate on in order to further improve the training regime. This is yet _another_ opportunity for an interesting side project for one or more team members - recording summaries of training sessions and maintaining a training log, perhaps making a minisite which can serve as the organisation's internal knowledge base.

#### Execute

It's important that training is carried out with a certain measure of discipline to highlight its importance. It requires a suitable environment, preferably one separate from people's ordinary work environment. A quiet cafe, bar or restaurant could work, but a closed off meeting or conference room is ideal. Let everyone know that training sessions should not be interrupted; just as with working on a complex problem, even minor distractions can turn out to be a major disruption. Everyone should agree that attendance is mandatory and exceptions or rescheduling should only happen in extreme circumstances. Any distractions such as phones and laptops should be turned off.

If you're working in a distributed team or have off-site team members, you could share the benefit of training with them by recording it or providing a live feed via Skype or Google Hangouts or some such. Encourage them to also take part or watch whilst in a quiet and comfortable environment.

Despite all this discipline, try and keep the actual sessions fun and entertaining. If they become just another boring work meeting they may not be successful. Hopefully if you have different presenters each week the format will be varied enough to remain engaging. It's also a good idea to make people from different roles or teams collaborate on a training presentation, because such people may have different insight and perspectives on the topic.

If your team is stuck for topic ideas, a great one that can always be repeated is the deconstruction of a recently completed project. Identify what worked and what didn't, issues that arose, and what could have been done better. Review the tools, technologies and techniques used and take this opportunity to get feedback form the team who worked on the project. That way everyone will be made aware of how to improve future projects.

Think about how you want to structure each session. Like with any presentation you'll want to start with a basic introduction to the topic - why it's relevant in the wider industry context, why the topic was selected, and what is the presenter's level of experience with this topic. It may also be a good time to first review homework from the previous session, but we'll get to that soon.

Into the meat and potatoes of the talk, you'll want to go into more detail without making any assumptions about what people may already know. Explain the purpose of the tool, technique, or technology, suggest situations in which it's best used and what its limitations are. As much as possible, use examples to reinforce the information. Keep examples small and succinct, and make sure they are shared after the session. Always avoid live coding, unless it's very simple and has been prepared in advance. There's no better way to lose audience interest than by spending time umming and erring while fixing unexpected bugs and typos. If the topic is particularly large or complex, try to stick to the time limit and break it into multiple sessions, starting with the simplest and increasing in complexity each week until it's been fully covered.

Finish the session with a quick summary and then invite questions and discussion. At the end you may also want to explain and assign homework tasks. Information learned during a training session, just as that gleaned from an online tutorial or blog post, can rarely be converted to useful knowledge without practical application, and may even be forgotten entirely. If possible, it always a good idea to give people a small practical task as a starting point for their own independent learning. The assignment should be small enough to be doable within the time constraints of people's busy work schedules, or so as not to impact so significantly on their personal time that they are discouraged from trying it altogether. It should of course be optional, as people won't always have the time or inclination - perhaps the topic wasn't entirely useful or interesting to everyone. However by reviewing the homework assignment at the start of the next session then everyone at least has the chance to learn from it. If the topic and the assignment are planned well and are interesting and useful enough, people will more likely be encouraged to have a go, show off their skills, gain recognition from colleagues, and even maybe win a prize. It's also a great chance for you to see who are the most motivated learners.

#### Improve

Nothing is ever perfect and as with every other aspect of your organisation you should be trying to continually improve. Always review the effectiveness of each training session and try and seek as much feedback as possible from the team. Keep training collaborative and be prepared to make changes to the training plan.

Also, try and keep an eye on the big picture - how the training is slowly impacting your organisation and your team's wellbeing. Maybe some areas may need focus over others.

### Community

People, especially senior managers, often love to talk about company “culture”. This is, in essence, an attempt to provide team members with a sense of unity and ownership and thus the incentive to contribute more. Culture cannot be dictated though, no matter what crass marketing techniques you employ, rather it comes naturally as a product of the combined personalities of individual team members. Now I'm not saying tech geeks don't have personalities, but it's not uncommon for the more technology-oriented organisations to be less enthusiastic when it comes to organisation culture.

A great way of fostering an organisational culture and team unity is by using a centralised communication tool where everyone may have free and open personal or professional discussions from wherever they are. This may be in the form of an intranet site, or an online service like Slack or even an IRC channel.

Your organisation should have its own website to showcase your work and promote your individual team members. This shows to the world that you are proud of your work _and_ your people, every one of them.

A public blog can be another great way of increasing your organisation's profile. This in turn raises the value and confidence of each team member. As their employer organisation becomes more well known they can cash in on that added credibility. They may even be encouraged to refer to this blog on their own websites or social media profiles, and thus your organisation's name or logo becomes a badge of honour. Encourage team members to contribute articles on their areas of interest to further increase involvement and a sense of ownership. Like communication tools and an organisation website, a blog is another great example of a side project that your team can produce internally. This offers a great opportunity to foster that all-important sense of ownership, as well as to allow for learning and experimentation with new tools and techniques from planning and design to development, content and project management.

Conferences can also be a great way to increase the profiles of both your organisation and your individual team members. Certainly encourage and sponsor attendence; it shows people that you value their skills enough to invest in them. You may even have the spare cash to be able to sponsor the organisation of conferences, or even host conferences or seminars yourself. As well as raising your profile, this will provide you and your team with the perfect opportunity to interact with the wider web community, observe the latest trends, show off your own skills and products, and maybe even find potential new team members.

Lastly, the most obvious way to encourage team unity is through (optional!) social gatherings. Note that this is not the same as prescribed and forced “team-building” exercises that nobody enjoys - they only serve to encourage unity through mutual embarassment and annoyance. Social gatherings are difficult though because they have to be varied enough to include and appeal to everyone. A BBQ restaurant won't be very enjoyable if one or more of the team is a vegetarian, nor would a pub crawl be much fun for a tee-totaller. If you know your team and what they like, then organising such gatherings should be easier.

## Picking the project

This may not always be feasible depending on your financial situation, but it's a good idea to carefully review stakeholder requirements before agreeing to a project. It may be that your team's skillset doesn't cover the requirements and so your team will struggle to produce the work if you take on the project. The result will be an unhappy and stressed team, and a less than satisfactory product. If you agree to everything that arrives in your inbox, have your team waiting for imaginary requirements and resources, or agree to work with a nightmare client just because they represent a well-known brand, then you are doing a disservice to your team, your work, and yourself.

You know your team's capabilities, strengths, and weaknesses. You should also know their workload. You should consult them before taking on anything new to see if they are confident they can do the work and have capacity, and also measure their excitement. That's not to say that you should force yourself into democratic decision making when it comes to specific tactical decisions. You should know what you're going to do and whether your team can handle it. It may be the case that you can negotiate with your client or stakeholder to reduce or simplify the required features, or even work in cooperation with another team.

It's also your responsibility to assess whether the client or stakeholder is reliable. Are they providing sufficiently detailed requirements? Will they provide useful and timely feedback? Will they be enjoyable and professional to work with? Will they pay?

## Gathering feedback

You represent the production team so you need to be accutely aware of how your clients are being treated, how their projects are being managed, and how they are progressing. The quality of the work your team produces is ultimately determined by decisions you make and actions you take. Just as your clients have their goals and success criteria, you must have your own success criteria and ways of assessing the quality of your team's work and how closely you're meeting stakeholders' requirements. Gathering feedback from both staff and clients/stakeholders is an important part of your role.

For getting feedback from project owners, a phone call may suffice. However this is a very direct and personal form of communication so people may feel under pressure to provide overly-positive or dishonest feedback. It also means the feedback is more difficult to document. Of course positive feedback is great and you want to be able to share it with your team. But remember you're also looking for negative feedback. You can only learn from your mistakes so it's important to try and identify points of weakness in your service.

A great way of getting useful and constructive feedback is to conduct quick stakeholder surveys. Project owners are likely to be busy and may consider your relationship over once the project is complete, so try to keep it short. You may consider running feedback surverys both during and after the project to compare how their opinions change.

Remember, as with any survey, to be specific. Refer directly to the original project goals and find ways to tease out quantifiable answers: yes or no answers to specific questions, ratings from 1 to 5 about areas of your service. By all means allow them to add more details if they are so inclined, but unless answers can be quantified then you'll have no way of measuring progress or improvement.

> Perhaps a fun side project for your team would be to have them build a CRM - Customer Relationship Management - tool that facilitates collecting customer feedback!

Another great, if not daunting, way to gather feedback is to submit your team's work to online showcase directories and competitions. Assuming your client or project owner agrees, industry peers may be able to offer more specific feedback about the design or technology that your team may want to take into consideration. Of course if you happen to win any competitions or awards then it's good news all round!