# Client Managers

_Reading time ~ 45 minutes_

Your role is the most important. You are the interface between the project owner (the “client”) and the production team. That means that at some stage in every project, one or the other, probably both, are going to be pissed off with you. You may even find yourself in the position of negotiating internal conflicts within your team. How well you handle all of that depends on how well you've prepared, for this role is all about being prepared. Being prepared and being organised.

Another part of your role may involve actually seeking work. In such cases you need to represent your team and promote their skills as well as your own.

## Pitching for work

This may not apply to everyone, only those who are required to actively seek work for their organisation. If that's not you, then skip to the next section.

Should you pitch for work? no. Why? Well I'll tell you.

If you've ever watched _‘Mad Men’_ you'll be familiar with the practice. It was common in the 1960s and has, bizarrely, somehow survived into the 21st century. The client tells you they want a campaign, without giving much detail or direction. The agency furiously works on multiple ideas, picking at least one to present to the clients when they're invited in for a pitch meeting. Sometimes the agency will be invited to the client's office but it's the same game. The reason this worked in the 1960s was because there were few media platforms on which to advertise - newspapers or magazines, radio, and later TV. Today we have all those and more, but web projects aren't advertising projects so we can drop the analogy here.

The practice is still basically the same though - a company might put out an RFP - Request for Pitch - which tells you they want “a website” or “an app” and maybe goes into some minor details about what kind of website or app they're looking for. With that little information, agencies scramble to create high-fidelity mockups using placeholder content. Basically anything with the company's colours and logo on it that looks smart enough to impress the easily impressed. They'll turn up for the pitch meeting with the mockups and their fingers crossed. “Do you like that?”, “How about this?”.

This is an utter waste of time that cheapens the web agency and harms the industry as a whole. Web projects are complex and need detailed analysis of requirements followed by planning and a well-thought out design process. Even if the client company acknowledges that the mockup is just an example of the agency's design style, it's no way to chose an agency as it doesn't reflect at all the agency's overall capability or ability to produce what the company is expecting. The agency is essentially creating solutions without fully understanding the problem. It's like a doctor prescribing medicine before they've even looked at the patient - the patient has just Google'd their symptoms. Web designers are problem solvers and consultants, their job is to understand the design issues and create a unique solution for each project. By asking them to produce pitch work, they are reduced to just mere stylists producing pretty and superficial pictures.

Part of your role is controlling revenue. You're bringing in the work, you're delivering it, and you're charging for it. You're giving work to your team. By agreeing to pitch work, you're giving away your team's ideas for free. It can of course be temping if the company is famous and would be a shining addition to your organisation's portfolio. Tempting too if they're posing an interesting design problem. Your team may even be eager to do the pitch work in order to get the opportunity to work on such a project. But by doing the work before you've been commissioned you've devalued your entire team. You make the work less valuable to the client and they become accustomed to ideas being cheap. How do you think that's going to work out when it comes to quoting and invoicing them?

Sometimes a client will offer companies a small fixed fee for a pitch. This may reduce the risk but often these fees do not cover costs nor resolve the main issue - the pitch work does not solve the client's problem. Another problem is introduced here, that the client may feel even more entitled to use your pitch work given that they've paid you a nominal amount for it, regardless of whether your agency is awarded the contract.

In addition to the expense of providing free work, pitching has the added cost of practice. Producing work for a pitch is not the same as for a real-world project and so the chances are your agency won't be awarded the work every time. Preparing for each pitch requires planning, brainstorming, documenting, and designing. Then there are the additional costs of transport to and from meetings, maybe even meals, expenses, accommodation etc. You may find you've already spent a large portion of the potential income from the project before you've even started it. This is negative wealth and affects not just your agency but the industry as a whole. The more you pitch and the more practice you get, the greater your success rate may be, but not necessarily.

Then there's the competition. Often the client company may already have a bias towards another agency and are just organising a pitch to show industry peers that they have selected the best agency out of a number of suitors. Maybe they've already worked with a rival agency before, or maybe the client company's representative has a personal relationship with someone in another agency but they don't want to appear to be playing favourites. It's not always a fair fight. Furthermore, rival agencies, through personal connections or investigation or by other means, may know more than what was shared in the brief, putting them at an unfair advantage. Maybe someone on the client side already has in mind the exact technology they want to use but haven't mentioned it in the brief. You could potentially lose the project purely on the basis of not including a certain word or two in your proposal.

The final problem with pitching is that the presentations, just like in _‘Mad Men’_ are theatrical performances. During your presentation you become desperate to please, and unwilling to admit to the client if something they've requested is unreasonable within their budget or inappropriate in terms of their stated goals for whatever reason. You're the expert, remember, and you're hoping that together with them you have a mutual, collaborative relationship, not one of audience and puppet-master. The nature of the relationship you have with your clients needs to be established right from the outset. You don't want to have to withhold creative ideas until some fixed-date performance, at which point the client will either upturn or downturn their mighty thumb of approval, all your team's work potentially in vain as you have no recourse to explain and justify design decisions.

Rather than pitching free work, pitch your team. You know what they can do with what budget, both in terms of time and money. If a budget isn't provided on the pitch brief, how can you propose a solution that your team can produce? You're either condemned to overshoot your quote and risk scaring away the client, or undershoot and risk working your team to the ground. Showcase what you can do and what you can offer people. No matter how you find potential projects, you have to find a balance between the effort you and your team put in and the commitment the clients are willing to make.

If you or your organisation have previously sought work through pitching, now is the time to stop. All at once, stop. Immediately. You may lose some opportunities at first but the work that you are awarded will end up being better quality and more rewarding for your entire team. That work itself can serve in your favour when seeking further opportunities. By telling clients and companies that you do not pitch, it shows you are confident and, most importantly, gives you the opportunity to educate them about why - that your goal is to use your team's expertise to solve their problems and establish a good working relationship rather than blindly kow-tow to their every whim. This sends a powerful message. Hopefully you'll be able to convince clients to skip pitches and just go with you directly, promising a more fruitful relationship. You can demonstrate to them your team's rich portfolio and creative capabilities that could be applied to their projects. Refusing pitch work also brings the issue of money into the conversation a lot earlier, which increases clarity for both parties.

Even if you do need to rely on occasional pitches - maybe you like the pressure? - you absolutely need to avoid mini-pitches throughout the project lifecycle. The “big reveal” when you've produced a new page or feature or site always fails because the work comes as a surprise. The clients were kept out of the loop and so when presented with the work they will inevitably feel the need to imprint their ownership by making arbitrary comments or design decisions of their own. Presenting work to clients should be about reviewing progress to ensure goals are being met. It should happen regularly at small incremental progress intervals to reduce risk of going in the wrong direction or having to undo or repeat too much work. Clients will surely appreciate having a clearer overview of progress and know that their feedback will be taken into consideration or even rejected if that's what the people they're paying advise, as long as their goals are being met. We can, in the end, learn something from _‘Mad Men’_, as Don Draper said: “if you don't like what's being said, change the conversation”.

## Finding the Work

If you're also serving the role of director and are running the whole team, then this is also covered in _Chapter 4 - Production Directors_. Directors are the ultimate decision makers who decide on the direction the organisation is taking and therefore what kind of projects you take on. They have put a team together and marketed the team's services with certain kinds of projects in mind. You are the filter; you see the projects coming through from existing clients and are perhaps the one seeking out new opportunities from potential clients. That means your role overlaps; you and your director share the responsibility for knowing your team's capabilities, strengths, and weaknesses, and getting them the work that they're going to be best at and enjoy the most. That's the work that will help grow your team and reflect well on your organisation.

Depending on your organisation's financial situation, or pressure from your boss, you may be tempted to take on any work that pays. That's the easy route, right? The money comes in, everyone gets paid, and everyone's happy? On the downside, the team resents you, people are unmotivated and do poor work, perhaps people leave and your team falls apart, only adding to your stress and pressure from above as you struggle to please your existing clients while simultaneously drawing in new work that your team may need to produce with a reduced skillset and dampened motivation. They key is, as always in your role, communication. For every potential project on your horizon, consult everybody. Gauge how nervous their reactions are or how excited. Give them as much information as you know, throw around ideas, get them to talk about it, and tease out of them how they might approach such a project. Can they do it, and do they want to do it?

Ultimately though, finding work is hard. You need to cast the net wide, show off your team, your past work, get networking, and send lots of emails out. A great way is to rely on existing clients, if you have any. Get to know their business and areas that might benefit from something your organisation could offer, be it new products or new technologies that could be applied. Maybe you have access to their metrics and could recommend a way to optimise their existing website or app to increase their conversion rate. Maybe they have new budget available since you last spoke and can now upgrade the previous projects that you worked on. A friendly and well-researched email may really pay off.

If for whatever reason you can't rely on previous clients for reliable ongoing work, then you'll probably need to cold-call or email your potential clients. This really isn't all that different from reaching out to your existing or previous clients - you still need to be friendly and well-researched. Everyone is busy and nobody is going to give much time to a template email. If they already know they need a website or app then they're probably going to find an agency via a search engine and pitch their projects themselves. If they don't know that they need one then you're going to need to convince them. You're going to need to find out what their business is missing or how such a project could benefit them specifically. Furthermore, they need to know why you're the team to build it. Even if they don't follow up on your offer, if your email makes an impact then you will more likely find yourself on their contact list and may very well be the one they call if they change their mind down the line. They may also be more confident to recommend you to others. Of course, to find businesses or organisations that may potentially be in need of a website or app is made more difficult by the fact that the best way to find them is... online... via their websites. In this case, what's wrong with their website? What's it not doing right? What can your team do better? What does the website tell you - perhaps there are dates or clues in the source code that indicate that the website hasn't been updated in years? This is your opportunity to show off your understanding to the potential client and what benefits your team could bring. You are the expert consultant who can improve their return on investment.

Finally, a great way to secure a steady stream of incoming work is to find a niche. No matter who you're building a website or app for, the underlying techniques are basically the same. However if you can generate a portfolio of work for a particular business sector - for example, higher education, food and drink, travel, etc. - then not only will you be able to market yourselves more easily to other business in that industry, but you'll also become the go to agency for such businesses so they will be more likely to seek you out, which will save you time and effort.

## Kicking off

So you've got a client and you've got a project, so it's time to kick things off. The first step is to really get to know your client. Your first few conversations with them should be about establishing their personality and management style as much as gathering requirements. You don't have to be friends or take each other out for cocktails, but you need to be sure that you'll be able to work smoothly together. Every personality requires a different approach and given that a large part of your role is customer service, you need to be able to tailor your service to each customer.

Sometimes you can tell right from the start if a project is going to turn out to be a nightmare - if the client is just spending a budget and doesn't care about the project, if they are rude, abrupt, or arrogant, if they are already making their own demands on specific design trends or technology choices, if they don't listen to your advice, or if they are already micromanaging the project, asking for direct access to your busy and undistractable designers and developers. It's not too late to back out.

Of course, most clients aren't like that at all. However your relationship with them does depend a lot on your own behaviour during those initial conversations. You have to set the tone. You are the expert. They are paying your organisation for your organisation's expertise. They need to be confident that you know what you're talking about, that you're worth the money they're paying, and that you're being honest. If they are not confident in your expert advice then the project will inevitably run into potential disasters such as the client demanding changes based on their own arbitrary design decisions or design by committee. Your team will end up working on a project that's going in a direction that they dislike and disagree with, killing their motivation and causing tension between you and them that may also put other projects at risk.

Part of getting to know the client is also getting to know their team, who else might be using the work that your team produces. Increasingly, many organisations have in-house development teams. This may be a cause for conflict if you cannot present your work in a way that conforms to their processes or understanding, or otherwise it may actually make life easier for you as they are more likely to be able to understand code deliverables without requiring extensive documentation. If there is already an in-house development team, then you may find yourself questioning why your team has been engaged to work on the web project. The answer is of course time. In-house teams are usually too busy with day-to-day maintenance to even consider how to improve and optimise the design, or the code, or even to learn about new industry techniques that could be used to evolve the project.

### Be an expert

In order for the client to be confident in your _expert_ advice, your advice does indeed need to be _expert_.

That means even though you may not be undertaking any design or development work personally, you need to have a thorough grip on what your designers and developers are doing. You should continuously research new technologies, tools, and techniques. This can be done either online via RSS, newsletters, blogs, and agregator sites etc. or by simply consulting the experts in your team on a regular basis. If your organisation runs training sessions then you should attend them too. Gauge what's exciting and what has potential applications that you can market to your clients. If you find yourself speaking with the client about something that you're not quite up to speed on, then it's fine to admit that you don't know, but you must reassure them that you can find out, you can consult your team, and that you will get straight back to them. It's important that you don't hesitate, make something up, or lie to them. More often than not they will notice and they will lose confidence in your expertise.

Part of showing confidence, is how you present your ideas. Present only your best idea. Not all of your ideas. Not a selection of your ideas. Your _best_ idea. This means your team doesn't need to be fragmented with different people trying to pump out different ideas, or overworked trying to meet an arbitrary idea quota. It forces them to pool their skills and share ideas to ultimately form their best possible solution. When you show the client your best idea, be prepared to back it up with explanations about all decisions made and how the idea came about. That's what they're paying you for. If you present more than one idea, they are forced to make the expert decisions about which might be better. In the worst case they may find this irritating, in the best case they have lost confidence in your team's ability to fully address their needs.

Before presenting any ideas to clients, be sure to consult your team. Share with them your full understanding of the problem and rely on their expertise. Even though you may have researched the relevant technologies yourself, it may not be you that will eventually be building the project and so you need to be sure that what you're promising the client is definitely something that your team can deliver, else everyone will be disappointed in the end. You'll also want to make sure that any solution you offer is one achieved through a consensus decision among your production team, not just your own, lest you sour your relationship with your team.

On occasion, you may find your clients disagreeing with your proposals. In this case, you need to be able to confidently explain the decisions and back them up with data or evidence as much as possible. This may be in the form of website analytics, public surveys, user statistics, or even well-respected blogs and articles from industry experts. You need to make them listen to you and be sure that their disagreement doesn't stem from some arbitrary personal preference. Don't forget - this book is about making the web a better place so you've got the users to think about too. You don't want to end up building something that performs poorly from a usability perspective just because your client's spouse likes it. Similarly though, you need to listen to them. You are the expert in the web and the production of web projects but _they_ are the expert in _their_ business. They know their users/customers better than you and there's a good chance their advice may be worth taking back to your team for discussion.

### Be Enthusiastic

No matter how busy and tired you are, maybe you're not even interested in the project, you need to be enthusiastic. Find something about the project you can care about. This can be difficult if you're working on multiple project simultaneously but it will come across in the way you communicate if you don't care as much about the success of the project as your client does. It may be a particular audience segment that presents new challenges, a new technology, a new business challenge - the chances are you can find something that will prevent you from just going through your normal routine to see the project through to completion, be it successful or not.

Enthusiasm isn't just the spriteliness of your tone either, it's expressed by the questions you raise, the frequency of your communication, and the level of understanding that you can demonstrate.

### Contracts & Agreements

The very first step in any project is setting down in writing exactly what your scope of work is and what are the roles and responsibilities of each party. Without a detailed agreement, you have nothing to fall back on if something goes wrong. It holds you, your team, and your client all accountable for the project deliverables. It also goes back to building client confidence in you and your team. Not only does it look professional, but you drawing up a detailed formal agreement lets the client know that you have fully understood their requirements and care enough about their project to put the time into it. Such an agreement may be known as a Scope of Work (SoW), an example of which may be found in _Appendix C - Scope of Work_, and should at its most basic level cover the following topics:

* Project Goals
* Feature Requirements
* Deliverables
* Roles & Responsibilities
* Timelines
* Change Request Policy
* Warranty & Legal Issues
* Budgets & Cost
* Success Measures & Performance Metrics

While the contract should be as explicit as required to convey the exact requirements and production plan, it should not be so rigid as to restrict the production team's flexibility to adjust feature prioritisation as the project evolves. Ensure that this agreement is **approved** by the client before starting work. We've already covered understanding the project goals so let's move on.

#### Gathering Requirements

This is probably the most important part of your role. Ensuring you clearly understand all of the product owner's requirements exactly right from the start will allow you to correctly assign resources, determine timelines, and budget costs. If you miss something, then you're likely looking at change requests, squeezed deadlines, unnecessary or repeat work (which the production team will love!) and overtime.

Given the importance of this task, it should be given due amount of time and diligence - a couple of Skype calls, even a few email relays, simply will not do. You have lots of questions to ask and information to tease out not just about the immediate functionality requirements but also look and feel and longer-term goals. This will hopefully eliminate any surprises for you or your client.

The real challenge is knowing what questions to ask. You need to tease out as much information as possible in what little time you have available. Before client meetings, plan exactly what you need to know and what you need to ask to find out. You'd best consult the production team as well, given that you will need to pass all this information on to them. So how do we approach this? The same way as with everything else of course - we take the larger problems and break them down into smaller ones. 

A good place to start is by concentrating on overarching features. What kind of content will the site or app be serving? What will it be used for? How are potential users envisaged to be engaging with it? What specific actions will need to be performed? From there you can drill down into finer details - the technology requirements, aesthetics, user demographics. Who will be maintaining it and what features will be required by them? What are the exact deliverables required? The list of questions is endless and will likely be different for each project. Answers will raise more questions and you should keep asking until you and your team are completely confident that you understand what is needed.

When gathering requirements, ensure that you talk to the right people. Sometimes known as “stakeholder interviews”, the idea is that you gather requirements from the project owner's team individually - anyone who will have a stake or claim in what the website or app should do or present to users will have their own specific requirements that they understand best. You and your team are in a much better position to gather and collate this information in order to identify the required features. If you just speak to one person, who represents all the stakeholder interests, then you risk information gaps or personal biases. Similarly if you try to gather requirements from a team of individuals at the same time you are also going to miss out on some information as well as potentially face conflicts or crossed messages, leading to the dreaded design by committee.

Requirements gathering is not limited to the project owners either. Your production team will also have their own requirements which they impose on the project based on the skills and tools they have available. What you can offer to the clients depends on what they can build.

This all leads to the ideal requirements gathering solution - an initial meeting to gather the overall feature set and project goals, followed by individual meetings with each stakeholder. Information drawn from these meetings can be taken back to your team, discussed, collated, and taken back to the client for another round of refinement. This sequence can continue until you and your team are fully confident in what you need to build, and your client is happy that you are going to build exactly what they want.

#### Responsibilities

It's important to clearly and precisely state who will contribute what to the project, and when they will be expected to provide their contributions. Try to be as detailed as possible. For example, you yourself will be responsible for communicating progress to your client as well as feedback to your production team. Be prepared to communicate quickly or at least be clear about when you will provide communications to who. Replying fast to emails or providing regular summaries is going to be appreciated, especially if unexpected. It shows that you are serious, reliable, and sends a positive tone. If you are too busy to reply to emails quickly, at least send a sentence explaining that you're busy and will reply later. Again, this builds trust because it's a gesture that shows how important the client is to you. 

Similarly you must agree with the client when they will provide feedback to you. If your team are forced to proceed with their work without having had feedback then they are at risk of producing new features based on outdated requirements that may be subject to change. The client must be made to understand this and commit to a regular communication schedule. If you have already done the same then it goes a long way towards building a mutual trust relationship.

Aside from you, your client, and all project stakeholders, all production team members should be listed along with their specific responsibilities. This makes it clear to everyone involved in the project exactly who needs to do what.

In cases where there is a gap in your team's available roles and you are unable to fulfil the requirements, you may need to consider outsourcing. It's always better to be up front about this front the start. There's no shame in temporarily extending your team to meet the requirements, as long as you can assure quality control. Going back to communication, you will need to reassure your client if you need to outsource part of the project. The very word "outsource" portrays connotations of cheapness, like you are taking part of their project and sending it somewhere else without much oversight. Make sure you outsource only to people you trust who possess skills that are on a par with those of your team.

#### Schedules & Deadlines

The contract should be structured to offer frequent deliverables and not multi-month or long-term milestones. Milestones/deadlines must always remain flexible and so the more space between them the more unlikely it is that they will be met smoothly. Shorter, more agile iterations are both easier to achieve, monitor, and offer more chances for immediate feedback and improvement on work completed. It's not just deliverables that need to be scheduled either. Meetings, especially those that produce client feedback, must also be on fixed schedules that commit all parties to working together and fulfilling their responsibilities.

Of course before compiling schedules you need to be sure you have all the required information at hand. Also, scheduling will come under the role of project management - your job is simply to report the schedule to the project owner and keep them updated on progress. How long each sprint/iteration/phase will take will depend on your production team so consult with them first, perhaps in a kick-off meeting, and give them time to assess the scope. If you are offered a ballpark length of time or a random deadline is plucked from a developer's mind then be wary. Instead ask to see a breakdown of features and iteration periods for each. You should also be made aware of exactly what is involved in the production of each feature, whether it requires planning, design, coding, testing, etc. so that if needs be you can explain and justify your schedule to your client. In the timeline you present to your client, you may also want to add some contingency time for each iteration - it's better to deliver early rather than late and better for the team to work at their own pace rather than feel rushed to work towards unrealistic deadlines. Rushed work is poor work.

#### Change Requests

You may spend weeks or months painstakingly working on a website, covering every feature request in detail, ensuring it's the best work your team can produce. You may be very proud of the work and eager to show the client. You excitedly send them an email and wait for the praise to pour in...

“Everything is great! but...”

and then more:

“maybe we could just change this one thing...”

“also I think this could do with a bit more work...”

etc. etc.

Any requested feature not clearly listed in the original scope is beyond that scope and therefore counts as a revision or change request. This must be made explicitly clear to clients. Extending the scope, also known as “scope creep” jeopardises all other features by disrupting work schedules and putting deadlines at risk. Luckily, in your written agreement with the project owner, you have established a policy for handling these change requests... right?

There are various solutions. You may want to state a specific number of permitted revisions within the project budget and timeline, although in doing so you are essentially banking on the requests being very simple. What if it's actually a significant amount of work? You can't always accurately assess feature complexity before work on it has begun and surely the client isn't going to be aware of how much work is involved in each request. Another approach is to charge a special fee or increased rate per change request. This is more reliable and may even serve to discourage the project owner from making such requests, which can only work in your favour. You may also factor several "rounds" of change requests into your agreement, allowing a fixed amount of time and budget for dealing with changes and new features. Whatever your own solution is, you should structure your agreement and your budgets to support delivery.

If of course you and a client are not a good fit, you may find yourself faced with multiple revision requests to the point where it is no longer worth your time. It is important to recognize when to walk away from a project.

#### Budgets

Don't shy away from bringing up money right at the start. Everyone knows that money is going to need to change hands so there's no point beating around the bush. Budgeting is hard. You essentially have to guess how long the project or feature set is going to take, or guess the value of the work to the client, in order to calculate how much to charge. Like with any difficult problem, it's easier to try and break it down as much as possible. Ensure that you consider time for research, planning, discovery, admin, prototyping, design, development, testing, fixes & revisions, and deployment. Typically 10% might be added for project management, but consider anything that might require more time or commitment - dealing with multiple stakeholders for instance, increasing the management time, might encourage you to increase your fee as well.

Indeed you're not just charging for the design and development or even the final deliverables. You may have PDFs, training workshops, interactive guides, and other educational material to prepare as part of the course that should be charged under client education. You have more organising, writing, designing, planning, and coding than you might at first be aware. The amount of client education required may very depending on the project owner so this will need to be factored into your pricing - hours spent helping your client use your product should be billable time. Typically you might want to add 10% onto your price as a contingency for "Support & Training" or "Onboarding". If they're going to need a lot of education but are not willing to pay for it then it may be wise to pass on the job. Most clients actually understand this. Those who are interested in improving their business are interested in improving themselves as well. This is the foundation for a truly fulfilling and mutually beneficial client relationship. Seek out these relationships. Bear in mind though that whether they want to pay for it or not, it is your responsibility to teach your client to use your product, otherwise your team's work will be for nothing (well, except some money... but we're trying to make the web better, right?). In some cases, you may be able to factor client education hours and their opportunity cost as part of your company's marketing budget. A happy client and a successful product may be worth more in the long run.

Another budget you may want to propose is an ongoing retainer. You can provide the client with all the documentation and tools and excitement as you like before pushing them out to sea, but how about rowing out with them? You could call it a digital strategy retainer, or whatever other buzz phrase you like, and help them grow their business online. Such a service, if your team is able to offer it, may include audience research, content creation, ongoing SEO, advertising, technical maintenance, social media management, and analytics reporting. This is usually not only educating and rewarding, but may even enable you to up-sell more work.

When it comes to presenting your cost estimate to your client, sending it as a plain number in an email is unprofessional and disorganised. It should be laid it out in your proposal or agreement where it can be fully justified. The more emails back and forth between you and your client discussing the cost, the more the value of the project is reduced as you spend more time haggling. By all means quote a final ballpark figure, but clearly state that the cost is variable depending on a number of factors such as eventual scope and the level of post-delivery support required.

You might want to break down the cost into design & development phases, costs for 3rd party tools and sofware, and admin costs like client-servicing and project-management. This will provide an overall cost that is helpful for project owners as they are usually shopping around for different service vendors so it helps them to compare. However, it's almost impossible for you to estimate accurately.

So how can you accurately assess how much to charge the client? Whatever you do, don't charge hourly rates. This limits your potential revenue and presents plenty of other problems:
* hourly rates have a ceiling - you can only charge so much until the client pushes back, regardless of whether the work is finished or not
* hourly rates are limited by the fact that there are only so many billable hours in a year
* hourly rates are too easy to compare but offer no reflection of the quality of services offered (e.g. you might charge $100 / hour compared with someone else who charges $95 / hour - on paper $95 seems more tempting, even though the production team may vary wildly.) - this may lead to clients trying to low-ball you
* hourly rates mean you're selling time, not results, and it's results that clients care about
* clients may become stressed as they worry about every single hour you and your team are working

A better way would be to charge on a weekly or monthly basis, as long as the focus is on the outcome or the project deliverables and not the time spent. Monthly billing is more appropriate for ongoing maintenance retainers.

Better still is a way that's also perhaps easier to estimate and is known as value-based pricing. Essentially you determine a number based around what the project is worth to the client. In order to be able to determine this, you need to obviously understand the project requirements in detail (_see above!_). For example, if the goal is to increase revenue of an online store by $1,000,000 per year, why not charge a one-off cost of $100,000? The client gets a good return on their investment and your organisation gets paid enough to cover costs and turn a profit yourselves.

At the very least, you should offer a fixed price on a per-project basis. The client knows the cost up-front, which also makes it easier for them to compare you with other vendors. Meanwhile you can focus your offering around the return on investment so that the client focuses on the result and not on the time or cost.

Always get a deposit at the start of a project. A deposit shows that the client is willing and able to pay, and tells them that you won't work without being paid. The size of deposit you ask for depends on the size of the project. Very big or lengthy projects may require ongoing payment instalments. If a client is reluctant to pay a deposit, then you shouldn't work with them, plain and simple. Chances are they aren't serious and probably won't pay later anyway.

#### The Measure of Success

At the start of your proposal or agreement you are stating the business goals - what the product is expected to achieve. If you want repeat work from the client then you'll need to prove than any previous work has indeed achieved its intended goals. Therefore towards the end of the proposal you should outline what the success measures are, or how you will have determined if goals have been achieved.

As with gathering any feedback, these measures should be specific and carefully considered to measure the explicitly stated goals. It's like setting up a scientific experiment - your hypothesis is that the project is successful so what conditions can you establish to test the hypothesis. This is of course easier if you have specific goals to start off with.

You could gather statistics about the website's usage based on its functionality, e.g. sales data, contact forms, or user-submitted content, or even by conducting user surveys from the product itself. The most common way to measure a website or app's success though is through the use of website analytics. There are various tools for doing this, most notably Google Analytics, but all of them require someone to set-up what user behaviour should be tracked and then be able to interpret the data. You should arrange with the project owner who should cover this role, and it may be a chance to up-sell more work in the form of ongoing support.

#### Ongoing support

This book is concerned with putting together the best websites and apps that we can so as to make the web a better place. You could build the world's greatest, sexiest, safest, most energy-efficient car but it would be no use if nobody could drive. All too often the websites we produce are handed off to clients who aren't equipped with the knowledge or guidance needed to maintain it, like a garden left to languish, overgrown and unkempt. Perhaps the product owner will have enough excitement at first to put a lot of effort into maintaining the site, especially if it's successful, but that excitement may wane or they may consider your work done and so no further work is put into updating or innovating on the website or app until it's too late or no-longer cost-effective and the whole thing has to be re-done. Our strategically crafted content gradually becomes replaced with fluffed-up filler and marketing jargon. Our well-thought out design begins to age in the face of new trends and techniques or technologies. Our code fails to perform against the latest tools employed by competitor projects. This is nobody's fault but our own.

Part or your role is to help the client in any way you can, even after project hand-off. The success of the project depends on the owner's ongoing effort and investment and a passionate and enthusiastic web professional like yourself obviously wants each one to remain successful. The better the project owner is are at putting our products to use, the better our products perform. See it as an opportunity to both educate and learn. Part of the challenge of guiding them on how to make the most of their product is putting yourself in their shoes. While your expertise might be more technical - you work with web projects day in, day out - you need to be aware that their processes and skills are different. Therefore every project owner will need a different approach, but you'll still have to meet them halfway.

Being able to explain to project owners the thought process behind all of your production team's strategic decisions throughout the project goes a long way to educate them about how to achieve and maintain the project's goals and how the project has been designed specifically for their own business processes. In doing so you're learning about their business process, knowledge that may help you in dealing with other clients on future projects, so such a support process is mutually beneficial.

Support usually involves setting an example. Your team puts together the initial content strategy, maybe even writes some sample blog posts, so you can show the project owner the direct benefits in terms of increased traffic. Another way of setting an example and sharing your expertise is by sharing relevant tools and articles than you and your team have used or referenced.

By fostering collaboration post-hand-off, you help the project owner use the product more effectively and grow their business. This also helps to alleviate the panic that naturally comes with going live because they know you'll be on hand to fix, test, and tweak. You may even find that gradually support agreements start make up a core part of your organisation's revenue and help to bring in repeat work as you are engaged to continuously update the products you build. As well as helping your clients' businesses to succeed, this makes the web a better place as a whole as those parts of it that you have put online always remain the best they can be. It's evolution, not revolution, as constant updates keep the product ahead of the curve rather than allowing it to become decrepit, forcing a difficult and expensive overhaul or redesign.

## Working Collaboratively

As we've already stated, the success of the web project depends on the project owner's ongoing investment. A good way to make them more personally invested, having a true sense of ownership, is having them involved in the actual production work. By this we mean sitting down with them and your production team together, at least during the planning stage of each project phase. Your team have the technical expertise and are the ones putting everything together, but by having your client, the one with the business expertise, physically present you can make use of your insight while they gain a better understanding of all strategic decisions that will equip them to maintain the product going forward.

Of course every client may require a different approach; some will just want you to go away and get everything done. It also depends on your team members; some may not be able to easily express their ideas to a layman. That's where you come in. You are on the fence between the product owner and the production team, with expertise from both sides. So it's up to you to find a balance where your client can feel suitably invested and involved, and your team suitably committed and recognising the value the client's insight brings. If the client makes a suggestion and a designer rejects it, offering a direct in-person explanation, the client can gain an understanding of the design process and value the designer more. Likewise if the client makes a suggestion that the designer agrees to, they gain a sense of ownership while the designer gets a new idea for free and is exposed to the client's better understanding of the target audience.

Working collaboratively may even take the form of working off-site from the client's location some or all of the time. This would allow the client to monitor progress themselves more directly (reducing your workload ;), although maybe your team might not feel so comfortable in that environment. Another way might be to conduct weekly workshop meetings to discuss a sprint or iteration. Either way, aside from giving both the client and your production team a sense of ownership and importance, this may pre-empt common issues and allow everyone to get to know each other on a more personal basis.

## Clear & constant communication

Along with gathering and disseminating requirements, communication is the very essence of your role, your raison d'être. Even if you have nothing to say, you should be in constant contact with your client, to re-assure them if nothing else, especially if they're paying you. Doing this increases your perceived value and the client's sense of ownership. It's important to always be clear about what your team is doing - remember that the client may not share your technical knowledge or expertise - and also to be completely honest. Even in an email it's obvious when someone is lying or deliberately trying to withhold information, and this can seriously harm your relationship with the client. If something does go wrong then let them know, and reassure them by letting them know what your team is doing to remedy the situation. Another thing to remember is to maintain the same tone. If your client relationship is friendly and informal then that's how your communications should be. On the other hand some clients may prefer more formal or succinct language.

At the very least you should be sending daily updates to your client and having weekly meetings during the course of the project. Even if the client says this is unnecessary, it's a point you should insist on. There is nothing worse for both them and your team than submitting a “big reveal” after a long period of silence - they will feel inclined to make changes or offer comments than require your team to go back and re-do some work or in a worst case scenario undermine their own strategic decisions. This is especially scary and frustrating when a deadline is looming just over the horizon. By setting out a communication schedule at the start and sticking to it, communicating as much or as little as required, you will be able to more easily manage their expectations.

Regular communication will also help you to understand and get to know your client, which will in turn build confidence. At some point you will need to be able to say “no” to them. Whether it be rejecting a feature request, revision request, a new deadline, design feedback, or when talking about costs, there are some circumstances where you or your team know best and you will need to assert yourselves. It's much easier, especially in your role, to be the salesperson with the positive, can-do attitude, always agreeing to every request, but sometimes it's just not a good idea. However, you can't say “no” directly. Nobody wants to hear that from someone they've asked, even paid, to do something. Of course, when faced with such a situation, a good web professional would understand the business driver and suggest alternative solutions that convey the same message and achieve the same goal but that are unique, original and creative. The best approach here is to say “yes” and explain the consequences, or say “no” but at the very least offer a viable alternative solution. This is where your confidence will come in handy - you need to be able to convince the client to drop their request or to go with your recommendation so it's important that you're speaking their language and talking in terms of benefits to their business. This may sound like coercion, but really it's a form of honesty and will draw more respect from a client than agreeing to everything and then delivering something late or of poor quality or that fails to meet their expectations. Having a project with a bunch of patches and hacks for every complaint or spurious request usually ends up being hard to iterate on and maintain. 

If your communication thus far has been professional and you've established yourself as the expert then you should be able to convince the client to go with your recommendations. If necessary, don't shy away from citing industry experts. If however you really have to admit defeat then take it as an opportunity by suggesting installing some analytics tracking or A/B testing to assess the success of the decision. Once you have hard data to backup a decision you'll know the best way to deliver return on investment. You never know, the client's decision may even be the right one.

Communication isn't just phone calls, video chats, emails, instant messenger, and meetings either. Documentation should be provided at every stage along with all deliverables. Sometimes for instance you may discuss strategic decisions over the phone, but unless such conversations are documented then it will be difficult to reference them later. That doesn't necessarily mean you neet to make a transcript of every phone call, but you'll want to at least follow up with an email covering any important points. Before arranging communication, you do need to consider the best method for different situations. When handing off deliverables for example, be it mockups, prototypes, or even code, is there accompanying information to help the project owner and their team to fully understand the decisions made about how and why you've done it the way you have? If not then be prepared for long e-mail threads that only really serve to waste everyone's time. Insist on thorough documentation from your team and make sure they are aware of the requirements when planning schedules. They should bear in mind who, on the client's side, the documentation is aimed at, and you should check this before delivering. It's no good writing technical documentation for a non-technical project owner. You'll also need to consider how the documentation is going to be received or presented. If it's something you may need to discuss in a meeting then maybe it should be in the form of a presentation. If it can be shared and read individually then a PDF may be more appropriate. If you need to give a presentation to a team of people in different physical locations then you might consider a video. Compiling documentation takes time and certainly isn't easy, but it's an essential part of the 2-way communication that your role entails.

## Delivery

So you've reached the end and it's time to hand over your team's work. It's the moment of truth. To ensure smooth delivery, give the project owner everything they need to get up and running as smoothly as possible. This may require separate delivery documentation detailing any URLS, login details, file and folder descriptions etc. that they can keep and reference. What you actually deliver, and how you deliver it, depends on the project and on the owner's requirements. For example, some organisations may have in-house development teams that just require templates that they integrate themselves. Some may just want you to deploy everything to a server for them and leave them to it. Some may require all the files along with some kind of easy installation instructions.

In fact, rather than delivering everything at the end of the project you're probably actually delivering throughout. Or at least you should be. For instance designs should be provided in the form of a style guide or pattern library than can be easily referenced, re-used, and updated either by your team, the client's in-house team, or by another team the client may wish to engage in the future, ensuring ongoing consistency throughout the project. Code modules might be delivered to internal teams in stages, allowing them to learn about the style and how it can be integrated into their codebase. Speaking of code, it's important that it be modular and reusable for the same reasons as we provide style guides.

The final point in this section is that you should see delivery as just the start of a project lifecycle. As you've hopefully convinced your client by now, a web project is an ongoing one. There are always changes to be made and new features to be applied, content to be refreshed and new platforms to explore. If it's a brand new project then this is at least the beginning of a test or beta phase after which strategic decisions need to be revisited.

## Gathering Feedback

Just like every other role, you too must gather feedback. The feedback you gather is important not just for you but for your entire team. Aside from gathering data on the website's success that you can pass on to the production team, based on some form of analytics or survey data as discussed above, you're interested in your client's perceived satisfaction both with you and the project overall. As usual, it's important to structure feedback requests so as to make it easy to extrapolate useful information from it. That means asking specific questions that reference specific aspects of the work. The very act of eliciting good feedback itself is a measure of your success; it means that your client has been made engaged enough to become emotionally invested in the project, and that's thanks to you. Let's recall what your role has covered since the project began:
* Gather requirements
* Compiling the propsal / agreements
* Scheduling
* Regular updates
* Accepting and applying the client's feedback
* Conveying expertise / educating the client
* Documenting

Given this list, you will want to formulate questions that asses the client's perception of how you and your team have handled the project in this context. For example:

* Did we fulfil the following requirements...
* To what extent have the deliverables met the expectations set in our original proposal [1-5]
* To what extent were we on shedule? How happy were you with the time we took to deliver each stage of the project? [1-5]
* How happy were you with the project updates I sent? Were they frequent enough? Detailed enough?
* To what extend do you feel you fully understand the strategic decisions we made? [1-5]
* How happy are you with the [code/design/something else] documentation we provided?
* How likely are you to recommend us / engage us again? [1-5]
* Any other comments?

These questions should be specific and measurable. As you get more project notches on your client management bedpost, you will be able to review and consider your own performance.






**************


**budgets:**

time tracker. past experience doesn't necessarily indicate the time required for similar tasks/projects. question all guesstimates. client-given constraints may relieve you of the need to create this kind of estimate - things like budget and hard deadlines - just find out what features you can confidently build within those constraints. with experience you may have an average weekly/monthly rate. clients may feel uncomfortable sharing budgets - you'll just ask for it all right? explain to them why you need these constraints. explain the mechanics of your cost and that you need to determine how much of your team's time they are able/comfortable to pay for.

**change requests:**

In these scenarios, the scope and work products tend to be more open-ended. We’ll have a prioritized list of things to work on, and we’ll work our way down it—with the understanding that the list may change as we gain more knowledge and new facts present themselves throughout the project. Again, we’re always focused on maximizing our value to the client, so if something more important has appeared, we won’t just keep plugging away at a task because that’s what the contract has bound us to.

This approach tends to bring us closer to an agile process, where our ship date is fixed, but the work product and deliverables are variable. This approach requires a certain amount of trust and empathy on both sides. Everyone needs to understand that none of us can guarantee exactly what’s going to be delivered at the end of the engagement. It may be scary, but this uncertainty is tempered by a different kind of increased control on the client side: they can continue to reprioritize and redirect us throughout the project, without negotiating change orders.

That isn’t to say we rush into these projects with no plan. Far from it. But we admit that our plans are imperfect and subject to change. Frequently we begin these projects with a research phase to define the rest of the project (or perhaps to define a second phase).

The big question in this kind of arrangement, then, isn’t “Will we ship that thing on time?” Rather, it’s “Is the work we’re doing worth more than the money our client is spending on us?” If the answer is yes, then the value is clear, and the details about the exact work product or deliverables become less important. If the answer is no, then it’s likely a bad match and you should shift your focus, or they should look for another vendor.

Easing the pain#section11

It’s not just in estimating scope that we encounter trouble. As Woody Allen famously said, “If you want to make God laugh, tell him about your plans.” No matter how we go about making estimates of things, it’s rarely foolproof.

So what else can we do to ease the pain of estimating?

Plan for the fan to be hit#section12

For one thing, we can plan for what to do when things go worse than we imagined. In my experience, people who build things (web things included) are often optimists. Why else would we agree to dive into the unknown again and again with each project?

Paul Ford’s epic article for Bloomberg, “What Is Code,” sums up the problem of estimation optimism fairly well:

You ask the universal framing question: “Did you cost these options?”

He gives you a number and a date. You know in your soul that the number is half of what it should be and that the project will go a year over schedule.
Clearly, we must plan for when things go less than ideally.

In hourly projects, we borrowed an idea from our friends at Sparkbox and include a 20 percent contingency budget on every project. The contingency budget is a line item like everything else, but we never track time against it. It just balances out against overages from other line items. It covers our butts when things take longer than expected.

Likewise on weekly projects, it often makes sense to not densely pack every week of the schedule. Having a penultimate week on the project that’s focused on things like “polish” or “fit and finish” can keep you out of trouble when something goes awry. And if everything goes smoothly, great! When could you not use an extra week to tighten the screws, refine UIs and interactions, test on a few more devices, or create documentation for the client team and—heck—your future self?

Reaching across the aisle#section13

Something that makes almost any project better—regardless of process or format—is good, open client communication. Why not extend this approach to the estimating process?

Says Ben Callahan, president of Sparkbox:

Lately we’ve been experimenting with an idea called “Collaborative Pricing.” It typically starts with an email from a potential customer where they’re answering a few key questions about budget, timeline, and scope. Our next step is to clarify any major questions we have based on the information we’ve been given. Then we’ll quickly put together a Google Spreadsheet that breaks down the work in a way we believe is reasonable given our current understanding… The idea is that we can work with our clients to find a budget, scope, and timeline that is mutually beneficial. We use Google Spreadsheets because it allows real-time collaboration but is also intuitive for anyone familiar with Excel or Numbers. The most helpful part of estimating in this way is that it makes the very first interaction we have with our customer one of collaboration.
Sounds pretty great, right? It encourages our clients to start prioritizing their resources (us) from the beginning. Do they want to pour extra hours into one feature instead of another? Do they want to cut something that doesn’t seem worth it, so they can add more budget to another area? Can they take a section or set of tasks off our plate (for instance, usability testing recruiting or QA) because they can assign internal resources to cover it?

Exposing the machinery of an estimate helps to demystify the process. It sets up a more collaborative relationship from the beginning, discourages adversarial behavior, and builds trust. These, my friends, are things of which a good client relationship is made.

Yeah great but how much does it cost?#section14

Just as there is no single good way to set pricing, there is no single good way to estimate. You’ll need to do some trial and error to see what works for you, your communication style, your design and development process, and your clients.

The web is always changing and so, it seems, is everything else in our industry. So don’t be afraid to experiment and try new things. If all goes well, you’ll have plenty of opportunities to try again, and refine your estimating process with each project. You may also find that as your organization grows, what worked before no longer does, and that a new approach is suddenly more suited to you.

And oh hey, I’ll be damned if that doesn’t segue us quite neatly into the final installment in this series, where we’ll investigate how scale affects our web businesses. See you then!